# YouTube - Programming from scratch

Go visit the playlist - [Programming from scratch](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLV8KdSaGiOUf0noBFegNj2bkNp4rCRCCU)

So, for a while I've wanted to create some kind of a "Programming from scratch" blog post, book, series, course, etc. and haven't really ever gotten around to doing it.

I often find I am a perfectionist, and want to only release something that's "perfect" or "acceptible" to my high quality standards.

But, that often comes with the risk of never finishing it, or re-starting it over and over without making progress.

So, I just started one day.

The above playlist is (I hope) an ever growing series of videos that I have the goal of teaching someone that's new to software development, how to do so.
And I mean from the basics, where I might explain things that to me (and maybe you) seem so basic its not worth explaining. However, to someone that it really is new knowledge
it will hopefully be valuable.

I start from explaining how I reset my PC to a base Windows 11 OS, then start to install apps like VS Code, Windows Terminal, Git and so on. I explain what a computer is, what
the different components are that make up a PC (to some extent).

I hope to move onto teaching how to program JavaScript, someday get into what circuits, logic gates and so on make up CPU's and how this ties into the Operating System, registers,
the fetch-decode-execute cycle, Assembly language etc. so the lower level concepts and lower level languages like C/C++/Rust can be understood as well. For me, a light switch
happened once I understood this when trying to get my head around C pointers, dereferencing, linked lists.

As part of the series I also plan to make it a bit fun as well to try and make at least one game - such as a snake game - even if its a really basic one using JavaScript and an
HTML canvas.

If you find it is interesting, useful, or have any feedback, suggestions, or topics you feel should be covered next, then don't forget to comment on my videos. Especially around
the audio quality and screen resolution, I think I already want to re-record some content, or at least the audio of it.

And of course, "click like, subscribe and ring that notification bell" ;)

Ciao for now.
