# Flutter

tags: flutter, dart, mobile, web, desktop, apps, wpf, ui, frontend

Back in April 2020, I had briefly tried going through the [Introduction to Flutter Development using Dart](https://www.appbrewery.co/p/intro-to-flutter)
course by Angela Yu.

I thought it was quite interesting, and the declarative model of user interface building really interested me.
It reminded me of Microsoft Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF).

Although, I only briefly learned it to do a demo mobile app for my Android phone, and didn't really pursue it much further.

At the time, [Flutter on the Web](https://flutter.dev/multi-platform/web) was also not yet released or was only in its early stages,
and since I was most familiar with JavaScript/TypeScript and web development, I decided perhaps having to learn Dart being
something I was not willing to commit my time and energy to.

I have been wanting to build a personal time tracking app for quite a while, and may revisit using Flutter to do so, since it
supports mobile, web, desktop, and I think I may want to be building a desktop app that isn't too heavy on memory (cough, Electron, cough).

Part of me is even toying with learning how to do it in C++, since I do have a bit of experience with some of the Windows APIs,
and really if its for me I don't need it to be cross platform anyways... but I also think this may involve even more time that
just learning Dart and Flutter.

So, today I downloaded it and also installed Visual Studio Community edition on my personal laptop, with the Desktop development with C++ workload installed.

Let's see if I actually do anything with it going forward :D

On the first run, Flutter will print out a message about how it tracks usage using Google Analytics - [see here](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/blob/61a0add2865c51bfee33939c1820709d1115c77d/packages/flutter_tools/lib/src/reporting/first_run.dart#L22).
You can disable this using the below command.

```shell
flutter config --no-analytics
```

You can also set the environment variable `FLUTTER_SUPPRESS_ANALYTICS` to `true` - [see here](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/blob/61a0add2865c51bfee33939c1820709d1115c77d/packages/flutter_tools/lib/src/reporting/usage.dart#L144).

```powershell
[System.Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable("FLUTTER_SUPPRESS_ANALYTICS", "true", "Machine")
```

Then to check the environment, you can run `flutter doctor`. In my case it warned me that I didn't have the tools installed for
Android development, namely the Android toolchain (Android SDK) and Android Studio, but this is fine since I will likely
focus on web and desktop first.

```shell
flutter doctor
```

I also noticed that you can use Visual Studio Code as an IDE, so I installed the [Flutter extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.flutter)
to try it out. I guess this may come in handy for the web development side, and maybe Visual Studio proper more for the Windows desktop app,
but this may be only necessary for the C++ wrapper solution that Flutter makes use of in any case.

In Visual Studio Code, you can use CTRL+SHIFT+P to open the command palette, and run Flutter commands, such as creating a new project,
selecting the devices. Running the project is also possible from the Run menu, where it asks for a Dart and Flutter configuration to
launch the desktop application, or you can also add a run configuration for this.

You can then also see the commands that were run from the Output window pane, selecting flutter, e.g. when creating a new project it runs the below command
after you've selected a folder:

```shell
flutter create --template app --overwrite --project-name someapp .
```

Its also possible to just run the application from the command line, for example, to see the available devices to run on:

```shell
C:\> flutter devices
3 connected devices:

Windows (desktop) • windows • windows-x64    • Microsoft Windows [Version 10.0.22000.795]
Chrome (web)      • chrome  • web-javascript • Google Chrome 104.0.5112.102
Edge (web)        • edge    • web-javascript • Microsoft Edge 104.0.1293.63
```

Then to run the app for the Chrome device on the web platform, you can run:

```shell
C:\> flutter run -d chrome
Launching lib\main.dart on Chrome in debug mode...
Waiting for connection from debug service on Chrome...             20.9s
This app is linked to the debug service: ws://127.0.0.1:50563/VvIm32AaoaI=/ws
Debug service listening on ws://127.0.0.1:50563/VvIm32AaoaI=/ws

💪 Running with sound null safety 💪

🔥  To hot restart changes while running, press "r" or "R".
For a more detailed help message, press "h". To quit, press "q".

An Observatory debugger and profiler on Chrome is available at: http://127.0.0.1:50563/VvIm32AaoaI=
Flutter Web Bootstrap: Programmatic
The Flutter DevTools debugger and profiler on Chrome is available at: http://127.0.0.1:9101?uri=http://127.0.0.1:50563/VvIm32AaoaI=
```

If you wish to run the windows app, you can run:

```shell
C:\> flutter run -d windows
```

## References

- https://docs.flutter.dev/
